doc/api_new/tutorial.cocitation.rst, before:

Co-citation Analysis
====================

Co-citation analysis gained popularity in the 1970s as a technique for "mapping"
scientific literatures, and for finding latent semantic relationships among technical
publications.

Two papers are co-cited if they are both cited by the same, third, paper. The standard
approach to co-citation analysis is to generate a sample of bibliographic records from a
particular field by using certain keywords or journal names, and then build a co-citation
graph describing relationships among their cited references. Thus the majority of papers
that are represented as nodes in the co-citation graph are **not** papers that responded
to the selection criteria used to build the dataset.

.. image:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/citationnetworks.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center
   
Our objective in this tutorial is to identify papers that bridge the gap between 
otherwise disparate areas of knowledge in the scientific literature. In this tutorial, we
rely on the theoretical framework described in `Chen (2006) 
<http://cluster.cis.drexel.edu/~cchen/citespace/doc/jasist2006.pdf>`_ and `Chen et al. 
(2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_.

According to Chen, we can detect potentially transformative changes in scientific 
knowledge by looking for cited references that both (a) rapidly accrue citations, and (b)
have high betweenness-centrality in a co-citation network. It helps if we think of each
scientific paper as representing a "concept" (its core knowledge claim, perhaps), and a 
co-citation event as representing a proposition connecting two concepts in the
knowledge-base of a scientific field. If a new paper emerges that is highly co-cited with
two otherwise-distinct clusters of concepts, then that might mean that the field is
adopting new concepts and propositions in a way that is structurally radical for their
conceptual framework.

`Chen (2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_ introduces sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) as a 
metric for potentially transformative cited references:

.. math::

   \Sigma(v) = (g(v) + 1)^{burstness(v)}
   
...where the `betweenness centrality 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betweenness_centrality>`_ of each node :math:`v` is:

.. math::

   g(v) = \sum\limits_{i\neq j\neq v} \frac{\sigma_{ij} (v)}{\sigma_{ij}}
   
...where :math:`\sigma_{ij}` is the number of shortest paths from node *i* to node
*j* and :math:`\sigma_{ij}(v)` is the number of those paths that pass through *v*.
   
:math:`burstness` (0.-1. normalized) is estimated using `Kleingberg's (2002)
<http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/bhs.pdf>`_ automaton model.

First, we'll build a time-variant co-citation network. We'll then use Chen's sigma 
(:math:`\Sigma`) metric to identify potential turning-points in our corpus.

Getting Started
---------------

Before you begin, be sure to install the latest version of Tethne. Consult the
:ref:`installation` guide for details.

**If you run into problems**, don't panic. Tethne is under active development, and there
are certainly bugs to be found. Please report any problems, including errors in this
tutorial, via our `GitHub issue tracker 
<https://github.com/diging/tethne/issues?state=open>`_.

For this tutorial, you'll need some citation data from the ISI Web of Science. If this is 
your first time working with WoS citation data, check out :ref:`gettingdata`\. We'll
assume that you have downloaded a few sets of records from WoS, and stored them all in 
the same directory.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> datapath = '/path/to/my/data/directory'

Reading WoS Data
----------------

You can parse WoS data from one or multiple field-tagged data files, using the methods
in the :mod:`.readers` module. Since we're working with multiple data files, we'll
use the :mod:`.readers.wos.corpus_from_dir` method to parse the WoS data and create
a new :class:`.Corpus` called ``MyCorpus``.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.readers import wos
   >>> MyCorpus = wos.corpus_from_dir(datapath)
   
``MyCorpus`` should contain some :class:`.Paper`\s, as well as some citations.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> print len(MyCorpus.papers)	# How many Papers?
   1859
   >>> print len(MyCorpus.citations)	# How many citations?
   57774

If you have fewer :class:`.Paper`\s than you expect, it is possible that some of the
records in your dataset were duplicates. If you don't have any citations, go back
and make sure that you downloaded full records with citations from the WoS database. See
:ref:`gettingdata`\.

Building a Co-citation GraphCollection
--------------------------------------

Slicing a Corpus
````````````````
Think of slicing as indexing: we will divide the :class:`.Paper`\s in our :class:`.Corpus` 
into bins by publication date, so that later on we can retrieve sets of papers 
corresponding to particular time-periods. You can slice your data using the 
:func:`Corpus.slice` method.

In this tutorial, we'll slice our :class:`.Corpus` into two-year subsets using the 
"time_period" method.

.. figure:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/timeline.timeslice.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center
   
   **Time-period** slicing, with a window-size of 4 years.
   
.. figure:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/timeline.timewindow.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center
   
   **Time-window** slicing, with a window-size of 4 years and a step-size of 1 year.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> MyCorpus.slice('date', 'time_period', window_size=2)

.. code-block:: python

Time-variant co-citation graph
``````````````````````````````
We will use the :func:`.GraphCollection.build` method to generate a cocitation
:class:`.GraphCollection`\. 

The ``methods_kw`` parameter lets us set keyword arguments for the 
:func:`.networks.papers.cocitation` graph builder. ``threshold`` sets the minimum
number of cocitations for an edge to be included in the graph. ``topn`` sets the number
of top-cited nodes to include in each time-slice.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne import GraphCollection
   >>> kw = { 'threshold': 2, 'topn': 200 }
   >>> G = GraphCollection().build(MyCorpus, 'date', 'papers', 'cocitation', method_kwargs=kw)

Analyzing the GraphCollection
-----------------------------
According to the equation for sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) given above, we need to calculate
the betweenness centrality and the burstness of each node over time. The
:func:`.analyze.cocitation.sigma` method will do both of these things for us, as
described further down in this tutorial. For the sake of illustration, however, we'll walk
through the intermediate steps.

Betweenness centrality
``````````````````````
Betweenness centrality :math:`g(v)` is a measure of the structural importance of a node in
a graph. Formally, betweenness centrality is a measure of the number of shortest paths 
that pass through a particular node. A node with high betweenness centrality tends to 
connect disparate regions of a graph, linking clusters that might otherwise be
disconnected.

.. math::

   g(v) = \sum\limits_{i\neq j\neq v} \frac{\sigma_{ij} (v)}{\sigma_{ij}}
   
...where :math:`\sigma_{ij}` is the number of shortest paths from node *i* to node
*j* and :math:`\sigma_{ij}(v)` is the number of those paths that pass through *v*.

We can calculate the centrality of all nodes in each of the graphs in our
:class:`.GraphCollection` using the :func:`.analyze.collection.algorithm` method:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze import collection
   >>> bc = collection.algorithm(G, 'betweenness_centrality')
   
``bc`` is a dictionary of centrality values, nested like: 
``{ slice : { node : centrality } }``.

The nodes in our :class:`.GraphCollection` (``G``) are also updated with their centrality
values.
   
Burstness
``````````
`Kleingberg's (2002) <http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/bhs.pdf>`_ burstness model
is a popular approach for detecting "busts" of interest or activity in streams of data
(e.g. identifying trending terms in Twitter feeds). Chen (2009) suggests that we apply
this model to citations. The idea is that the (observed) frequency with which a reference 
is cited is a product of an (unobserved) level or state of interest surrounding that 
citation. Kleinberg uses a hidden `hidden markov model 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_Markov_model>`_ to infer the most likely sequence of
"burstness" states for an event (a cited reference, in our case) over time. His algorithm
is implemented in :func:`.analyze.corpus.feature_burstness`\, and can be used for any
feature in our :class:`.Corpus`\.

Since citations are features in our :class:`.Corpus`, we can use the 
:func:`.analyze.corpus.burstness` method to get the burstness profiles for the
top-cited reference in our dataset.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze import corpus
   >>> B = corpus.burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True)
   >>> B['BIOLOGY MR 2009 NATURE']
   ([2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013], [0., 0.4, 0.6, 0.2, 0.])

``perslice=True`` tells Tethne to get the ``topn=2`` most cited references for each
slice in ``MyCorpus``. ``burstness()`` returns a dictionary, ``B``; the keys are our cited
references, and the values are ``(dates,burstness)`` tuples for each reference.

Burstness values are normalized with respect to the highest possible burstness state. In
other words, a burstness of 1.0 corresponds to the highest possible state. We can control
the number of states by adding the keyword argument ``k``, for example:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> B = corpus.burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True, k=10)

The :mod:`.analyze.corpus` module also provides a simple way to visualize the burstness
of our cited references: :func:`.analyze.corpus.plot_burstness`\.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze.corpus import burstness
   >>> fig = plot_burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True)
   >>> fig.savefig('~/burstness.png')
       
Years prior to the first occurrence of each feature are grayed out. Periods
in which the feature was bursty are depicted by colored blocks, the opacity
of which indicates burstness intensity.

.. figure:: _static/images/burstness.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center

Sigma
`````
`Chen (2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_ proposed sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) as a 
metric for potentially transformative cited references:

.. math::

   \Sigma(v) = (g(v) + 1)^{burstness(v)}
   
The module :mod:`.analyze.cocitation` provides methods for calculating :math:`\Sigma`
from a cocitation :class:`.GraphCollection` and a :class:`.Corpus` in one step.

The method :func:`.analyze.plot_sigma` calculates :math:`\Sigma` for each node in each
time-slice of our :class:`.GraphCollection`\, and also generates a figure that shows
values for the top nodes in each slice.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze.cocitation import plot_sigma
   >>> fig,G = plot_sigma(G, MyCorpus, topn=5, perslice=True)
   >>> fig.savefig('~/sigma_plot.png')

In the figure below, the top 5 most sigma-influential nodes in each slice are shown. Red 
bands indicate periods in which each paper had a high :math:`\Sigma`; opacity indicates 
the intensity of :math:`\Sigma` (normalized by the highest value in the plot). Those red
bands suggest points at which that particular paper may have significantly altered the
conceptual framework of the field represented by our corpus.

.. figure:: _static/images/sigma_plot.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center
   
In the last step, the nodes in ``G`` were also updated with :math:`\Sigma` values. We can 
write our :class:`.GraphCollection` as a dynamic graph for visualization in Cytoscape
using the :func:`.writers.collection.to_dxgmml` method:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.writers import collection
   >>> collection.to_dxgmml(G, '~/cocitation.xgmml')

In the visualization below, node and label sizes are mapped to :math:`\Sigma`, and border 
width is mapped to the number of citations for each respective node in each slice.

.. figure:: _static/images/cocitation_sigma2.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center

Commit message:

docs, test for geocode tutorial
Former-commit-id: c21030d32c7b1aceeb1d2eba638eca626343e5d4 [formerly 749435236c8c75421cef8e94b5b5c2fd2a68c482]
Former-commit-id: d50c080a6f5bc86eea7421648d46712c22101745

doc/api_new/tutorial.cocitation.rst, after:

Co-citation Analysis
====================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. note:: This tutorial was developed for the course `Introduction to Digital &
   Computational Methods in the Humanities (HPS) <http://devo-evo.lab.asu.edu/methods>`_,
   created and taught by `Julia Damerow <http://devo-evo.lab.asu.edu/?q=damerow>`_ and   
   `Erick Peirson <http://gradinfo.cbs.asu.edu/?page_id=49>`_.

Co-citation analysis gained popularity in the 1970s as a technique for "mapping"
scientific literatures, and for finding latent semantic relationships among technical
publications.

Two papers are co-cited if they are both cited by the same, third, paper. The standard
approach to co-citation analysis is to generate a sample of bibliographic records from a
particular field by using certain keywords or journal names, and then build a co-citation
graph describing relationships among their cited references. Thus the majority of papers
that are represented as nodes in the co-citation graph are **not** papers that responded
to the selection criteria used to build the dataset.

.. image:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/citationnetworks.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center
   
Our objective in this tutorial is to identify papers that bridge the gap between 
otherwise disparate areas of knowledge in the scientific literature. In this tutorial, we
rely on the theoretical framework described in `Chen (2006) 
<http://cluster.cis.drexel.edu/~cchen/citespace/doc/jasist2006.pdf>`_ and `Chen et al. 
(2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_.

According to Chen, we can detect potentially transformative changes in scientific 
knowledge by looking for cited references that both (a) rapidly accrue citations, and (b)
have high betweenness-centrality in a co-citation network. It helps if we think of each
scientific paper as representing a "concept" (its core knowledge claim, perhaps), and a 
co-citation event as representing a proposition connecting two concepts in the
knowledge-base of a scientific field. If a new paper emerges that is highly co-cited with
two otherwise-distinct clusters of concepts, then that might mean that the field is
adopting new concepts and propositions in a way that is structurally radical for their
conceptual framework.

`Chen (2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_ introduces sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) as a 
metric for potentially transformative cited references:

.. math::

   \Sigma(v) = (g(v) + 1)^{burstness(v)}
   
...where the `betweenness centrality 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betweenness_centrality>`_ of each node :math:`v` is:

.. math::

   g(v) = \sum\limits_{i\neq j\neq v} \frac{\sigma_{ij} (v)}{\sigma_{ij}}
   
...where :math:`\sigma_{ij}` is the number of shortest paths from node *i* to node
*j* and :math:`\sigma_{ij}(v)` is the number of those paths that pass through *v*.
   
:math:`burstness` (0.-1. normalized) is estimated using `Kleingberg's (2002)
<http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/bhs.pdf>`_ automaton model.

First, we'll build a time-variant co-citation network. We'll then use Chen's sigma 
(:math:`\Sigma`) metric to identify potential turning-points in our corpus.

Getting Started
---------------

Before you begin, be sure to install the latest version of Tethne. Consult the
:ref:`installation` guide for details.

**If you run into problems**, don't panic. Tethne is under active development, and there
are certainly bugs to be found. Please report any problems, including errors in this
tutorial, via our `GitHub issue tracker 
<https://github.com/diging/tethne/issues?state=open>`_.

For this tutorial, you'll need some citation data from the ISI Web of Science. If this is 
your first time working with WoS citation data, check out :ref:`gettingdata`\. We'll
assume that you have downloaded a few sets of records from WoS, and stored them all in 
the same directory.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> datapath = '/path/to/my/data/directory'

Reading WoS Data
----------------

You can parse WoS data from one or multiple field-tagged data files, using the methods
in the :mod:`.readers` module. Since we're working with multiple data files, we'll
use the :mod:`.readers.wos.corpus_from_dir` method to parse the WoS data and create
a new :class:`.Corpus` called ``MyCorpus``.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.readers import wos
   >>> MyCorpus = wos.corpus_from_dir(datapath)
   
``MyCorpus`` should contain some :class:`.Paper`\s, as well as some citations.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> print len(MyCorpus.papers)	# How many Papers?
   1859
   >>> print len(MyCorpus.citations)	# How many citations?
   57774

If you have fewer :class:`.Paper`\s than you expect, it is possible that some of the
records in your dataset were duplicates. If you don't have any citations, go back
and make sure that you downloaded full records with citations from the WoS database. See
:ref:`gettingdata`\.

Building a Co-citation GraphCollection
--------------------------------------

Slicing a Corpus
````````````````
Think of slicing as indexing: we will divide the :class:`.Paper`\s in our :class:`.Corpus` 
into bins by publication date, so that later on we can retrieve sets of papers 
corresponding to particular time-periods. You can slice your data using the 
:func:`Corpus.slice` method.

In this tutorial, we'll slice our :class:`.Corpus` into two-year subsets using the 
"time_period" method.

.. figure:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/timeline.timeslice.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center
   
   **Time-period** slicing, with a window-size of 4 years.
   
.. figure:: _static/images/bibliocoupling/timeline.timewindow.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center
   
   **Time-window** slicing, with a window-size of 4 years and a step-size of 1 year.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> MyCorpus.slice('date', 'time_period', window_size=2)

.. code-block:: python

Time-variant co-citation graph
``````````````````````````````
We will use the :func:`.GraphCollection.build` method to generate a cocitation
:class:`.GraphCollection`\. 

The ``methods_kw`` parameter lets us set keyword arguments for the 
:func:`.networks.papers.cocitation` graph builder. ``threshold`` sets the minimum
number of cocitations for an edge to be included in the graph. ``topn`` sets the number
of top-cited nodes to include in each time-slice.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne import GraphCollection
   >>> kw = { 'threshold': 2, 'topn': 200 }
   >>> G = GraphCollection().build(MyCorpus, 'date', 'papers', 'cocitation', method_kwargs=kw)

Analyzing the GraphCollection
-----------------------------
According to the equation for sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) given above, we need to calculate
the betweenness centrality and the burstness of each node over time. The
:func:`.analyze.cocitation.sigma` method will do both of these things for us, as
described further down in this tutorial. For the sake of illustration, however, we'll walk
through the intermediate steps.

Betweenness centrality
``````````````````````
Betweenness centrality :math:`g(v)` is a measure of the structural importance of a node in
a graph. Formally, betweenness centrality is a measure of the number of shortest paths 
that pass through a particular node. A node with high betweenness centrality tends to 
connect disparate regions of a graph, linking clusters that might otherwise be
disconnected.

.. math::

   g(v) = \sum\limits_{i\neq j\neq v} \frac{\sigma_{ij} (v)}{\sigma_{ij}}
   
...where :math:`\sigma_{ij}` is the number of shortest paths from node *i* to node
*j* and :math:`\sigma_{ij}(v)` is the number of those paths that pass through *v*.

We can calculate the centrality of all nodes in each of the graphs in our
:class:`.GraphCollection` using the :func:`.analyze.collection.algorithm` method:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze import collection
   >>> bc = collection.algorithm(G, 'betweenness_centrality')
   
``bc`` is a dictionary of centrality values, nested like: 
``{ slice : { node : centrality } }``.

The nodes in our :class:`.GraphCollection` (``G``) are also updated with their centrality
values.
   
Burstness
``````````
`Kleingberg's (2002) <http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/bhs.pdf>`_ burstness model
is a popular approach for detecting "busts" of interest or activity in streams of data
(e.g. identifying trending terms in Twitter feeds). Chen (2009) suggests that we apply
this model to citations. The idea is that the (observed) frequency with which a reference 
is cited is a product of an (unobserved) level or state of interest surrounding that 
citation. Kleinberg uses a hidden `hidden markov model 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_Markov_model>`_ to infer the most likely sequence of
"burstness" states for an event (a cited reference, in our case) over time. His algorithm
is implemented in :func:`.analyze.corpus.feature_burstness`\, and can be used for any
feature in our :class:`.Corpus`\.

Since citations are features in our :class:`.Corpus`, we can use the 
:func:`.analyze.corpus.burstness` method to get the burstness profiles for the
top-cited reference in our dataset.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze import corpus
   >>> B = corpus.burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True)
   >>> B['BIOLOGY MR 2009 NATURE']
   ([2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013], [0., 0.4, 0.6, 0.2, 0.])

``perslice=True`` tells Tethne to get the ``topn=2`` most cited references for each
slice in ``MyCorpus``. ``burstness()`` returns a dictionary, ``B``; the keys are our cited
references, and the values are ``(dates,burstness)`` tuples for each reference.

Burstness values are normalized with respect to the highest possible burstness state. In
other words, a burstness of 1.0 corresponds to the highest possible state. We can control
the number of states by adding the keyword argument ``k``, for example:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> B = corpus.burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True, k=10)

The :mod:`.analyze.corpus` module also provides a simple way to visualize the burstness
of our cited references: :func:`.analyze.corpus.plot_burstness`\.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze.corpus import burstness
   >>> fig = plot_burstness(MyCorpus, 'citations', topn=2, perslice=True)
   >>> fig.savefig('~/burstness.png')
       
Years prior to the first occurrence of each feature are grayed out. Periods
in which the feature was bursty are depicted by colored blocks, the opacity
of which indicates burstness intensity.

.. figure:: _static/images/burstness.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center

Sigma
`````
`Chen (2009) <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0904.1439.pdf>`_ proposed sigma (:math:`\Sigma`) as a 
metric for potentially transformative cited references:

.. math::

   \Sigma(v) = (g(v) + 1)^{burstness(v)}
   
The module :mod:`.analyze.cocitation` provides methods for calculating :math:`\Sigma`
from a cocitation :class:`.GraphCollection` and a :class:`.Corpus` in one step.

The method :func:`.analyze.plot_sigma` calculates :math:`\Sigma` for each node in each
time-slice of our :class:`.GraphCollection`\, and also generates a figure that shows
values for the top nodes in each slice.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.analyze.cocitation import plot_sigma
   >>> fig,G = plot_sigma(G, MyCorpus, topn=5, perslice=True)
   >>> fig.savefig('~/sigma_plot.png')

In the figure below, the top 5 most sigma-influential nodes in each slice are shown. Red 
bands indicate periods in which each paper had a high :math:`\Sigma`; opacity indicates 
the intensity of :math:`\Sigma` (normalized by the highest value in the plot). Those red
bands suggest points at which that particular paper may have significantly altered the
conceptual framework of the field represented by our corpus.

.. figure:: _static/images/sigma_plot.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center
   
In the last step, the nodes in ``G`` were also updated with :math:`\Sigma` values. We can 
write our :class:`.GraphCollection` as a dynamic graph for visualization in Cytoscape
using the :func:`.writers.collection.to_dxgmml` method:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from tethne.writers import collection
   >>> collection.to_dxgmml(G, '~/cocitation.xgmml')

In the visualization below, node and label sizes are mapped to :math:`\Sigma`, and border 
width is mapped to the number of citations for each respective node in each slice.

.. figure:: _static/images/cocitation_sigma2.png
   :width: 600
   :align: center
